updated readme (#151)
solid/mashlib: README.md

# Solid-compatible data mashup library and Databrowser

[![NPM Package](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/mashlib.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mashlib)

> The mashlib library (`mashlib.js`) is a solid-compatible code library of application-level functionality for the world of Solid. It compiles together all the following repository into what we know as `mashlib.js`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mashlib library (`mashlib.js`) is a solid-compatible code library of application-level functionality for the world of Solid. It compiles all of the following repositories into what we know as `mashlib.js`:
```

- [**solid-logic**](https://github.com/solid/solid-logic) — core business logic of SolidOS
- [**pane-registry**](https://github.com/solid/pane-registry) - an index to hold all loaded solid panes, whether statically or dynamically loaded
- [**solid-ui**](https://github.com/solid/solid-ui) — User Interface widgets and utilities for Solid. Building blocks for solid-based apps
- [**solid-panes**](https://github.com/solid/solid-panes) — a set of core solid-compatible panes based on solid-ui.

A colorful dependency tree can be seen [here](https://github.com/solid/solidos/blob/main/documentation/solidos_dependencies.svg).

## Developing mashlib

As part of the SolidOS stack, mashlib can be developed locally by setting up the SolidOS code. Read more about that on the [SolidOS Readme](https://github.com/solid/solidos#-getting-started-with-the-solidos-code).

## Goals

> The goals of mashlib overlaps with the [SolidOS Goals](https://solidos.solidcommunity.net/Team/docs/SolidOSNorthStar.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goals of mashlib overlap with the [SolidOS Goals](https://solidos.solidcommunity.net/Team/docs/SolidOSNorthStar.html).
```

## Typical uses

One major use of mashlib is as a "databrowser" for a personal data store.

Mashlib is used in SolidOS and contributes to:

> - SolidOS Databrowser Frontend - a frontend for Solid Servers like on <solidcommunity.net>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SolidOS Databrowser Frontend - a frontend for Solid Servers like <solidcommunity.net>
```

> - SolidOS Data-Kitchen - a stand-alone desktop app: <https://github.com/solid/data-kitchen<>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SolidOS Data-Kitchen - a stand-alone desktop app: <https://github.com/solid/data-kitchen>
```

> And mashlib is also used standalone as the SolidOS Databrowser Webapp and can be tried out at: <https://solid.github.io/mashlib/dist/browse.html>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mashlib is also used standalone as the SolidOS Databrowser Webapp and can be tried out at <https://solid.github.io/mashlib/dist/browse.html>.
```

> But mashlib is also used as a library by adding `mashlib.js` (of minified version) directly in your applications. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mashlib is also used as a library by adding `mashlib.js` (or minified version) directly to your applications. For example:
```

`<script src="https://solidcommunity.net/mashlib.js"></script>`.

## Previous versions of this documentation

Check out [SolidOS Pod](https://solidos.solidcommunity.net/Team/docs/solidos.html) for an earlier version of this documentation.

# Documentation

## Different implemnetation

### SolidOS Databrowser Webapp

The `static/browse.html` page is compiled one to one into the `dist` (output) folder of mashlib and makes mashlib available stand-alone as the SolidOS Databrowser Webapp.

You can see and try out a SolidOS Databrowser Webapp deployment under this link: <https://solid.github.io/mashlib/dist/browse.html>

> `browse.html`serves as a perfect example for: Solid WebID authentication and how to make use of mashlib function and variables. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`browse.html`serves as a perfect example for Solid WebID authentication and for making use of mashlib functions and variables. 
```

### SolidOS Databrowser Frontend

> The `src/databrowser.html`page is compiled into the SolidOS Databrowser Frontend which is displayed for each WebID on [solidcommunity.net](https://solidcommunity.net/). This is the case because the [solidcommunity.net](https://solidcommunity.net/) Solid Server is configured with SolidOS as its frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `src/databrowser.html`page is compiled into the SolidOS Databrowser Frontend which is displayed for each WebID on [solidcommunity.net](https://solidcommunity.net/). This is the case because the [solidcommunity.net](https://solidcommunity.net/) Solid Server is configured with SolidOS as its front-end.
```

> More information about the SolidOS Frontend and how to use it visit the [User Guide](https://github.com/solid/userguide).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information about the SolidOS Front-end and how to use it visit the [User Guide](https://github.com/solid/userguide).
```

### SolidOS Data-Kitchen

SolidOS Data-Kitchen uses `mashlib.js`as a direct import in its source code. Visit the code at [SolidOS Data-Kitchen GitHub](https://github.com/solid/data-kitchen).

## Mashlib global variables and funtions

> If one wants to use mashlib as a direct import (as a package dependency or script import) one needs to know how they immediate available global variables and functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one wants to use mashlib as a direct import (as a package dependency or script import), one needs to know how they make global variables and functions available.
```

> The availability of these global variables depends on how the sub-modules are imported and exported but also on where the variables are instanciated. For a basic theoretical read please read [this resource](https://www.javatpoint.com/javascript-global-variable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The availability of these global variables depends on how the sub-modules are imported and exported and on where the variables are instantiated. For a basic theoretical read, please see [this resource](https://www.javatpoint.com/javascript-global-variable).
```

> What does `global` mean in mashlib? We mean the `global object` which depends on different environments. In mashlib, for now, we use the `window`context which means these variables will not work in non-window contexts such as Node.js environments if directly used. (This does not mean you cannot use mashlib in Node.js environments -> just import it through npm). We will switch this at some point to the [`globalThis`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/globalThis).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What does `global` mean in mashlib? We mean the `global object` which depends on different environments. In mashlib, for now, we use the `window` context which means these variables will not work if directly used in non-window contexts such as `Node.js` environments. (This does not mean you cannot use mashlib in `Node.js` environments; just import it through `npm`). At some point, we will switch this to the [`globalThis`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/globalThis).
```

> Next we list the most important window context/global variables and which sub-repos are they exported from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next we list the most important window context/global variables and which sub-repos they are exported from:
```

> - [**solid-logic**](https://github.com/solid/solid-logic/blob/f606b31382a416ee6188930c3ca05cb4ae73cbda/src/index.ts#L29) exports among others: solidLogicSingleton, authn, authSession, store, chat, profile;
> - [**pane-registry**](https://github.com/solid/pane-registry) is exported entirely through the pane-registry variable;
> - [**solid-ui**](https://github.com/solid/solid-ui/blob/c5a8888d6cb61363bc0445be007e3c96de593338/src/index.ts#L79) exports among others: authn, store, rdf, dom under the UI variable;
> - [**solid-panes**](https://github.com/solid/solid-panes/blob/033f48f8987364cb131455b13e8b0637da95a5ab/src/index.ts#L53) exports getOutliner and the entire solid-ui through the UI variable, and solid-panes itself can be used through the `panes` variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**solid-logic**](https://github.com/solid/solid-logic/blob/f606b31382a416ee6188930c3ca05cb4ae73cbda/src/index.ts#L29) exports among others: solidLogicSingleton, authn, authSession, store, chat, profile
- [**pane-registry**](https://github.com/solid/pane-registry) is exported entirely through the pane-registry variable
- [**solid-ui**](https://github.com/solid/solid-ui/blob/c5a8888d6cb61363bc0445be007e3c96de593338/src/index.ts#L79) exports among others: authn, store, rdf, dom under the UI variable
- [**solid-panes**](https://github.com/solid/solid-panes/blob/033f48f8987364cb131455b13e8b0637da95a5ab/src/index.ts#L53) exports getOutliner and the entire solid-ui through the UI variable, and solid-panes itself can be used through the `panes` variable
```

For backward compatibility reasons, there are now different ways to make use of the same variables from mashlib. For example:

> - to make use of the UI (solid-ui) one can use `UI` or `panes.UI`;
> - authentication session, part of solid-logic, can be called as `authSession` or `UI.authn.authSession` or `panes.UI.authn.authSession`;
> - the store (from solid-logic) can be used as `store` or `UI.store` or `panes.UI.store`;
> - rdflib is entirely acessible as `UI.rdf` or `panes.UI.rdf`
> - the currentUser function is called as `authn.currentUser()` or `UI.auth.currentUser()` or `panes.UI.authn.currentUser()`
> - and to make use of the login pop up one needs to call `UI.login.loginStatusBox`function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- to make use of the UI (solid-ui) one can use `UI` or `panes.UI`
- authentication session, part of solid-logic, can be called as `authSession` or `UI.authn.authSession` or `panes.UI.authn.authSession`
- the store (from solid-logic) can be used as `store` or `UI.store` or `panes.UI.store`
- rdflib is entirely acessible as `UI.rdf` or `panes.UI.rdf`
- the currentUser function is called as `authn.currentUser()` or `UI.auth.currentUser()` or `panes.UI.authn.currentUser()`
- to make use of the login pop-up, one needs to call the `UI.login.loginStatusBox` function
```

> You can see an example usage in the [SolidOS Databrowser Webapp code](https://github.com/solid/mashlib/blob/main/static/browse.html#L11).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see example usage in the [SolidOS Databrowser Webapp code](https://github.com/solid/mashlib/blob/main/static/browse.html#L11).
```

1. The server supplies the actual data of the to-do list or whatever it was.
1. The `mashlib.js` code provides an editable visualization on the data.

> The mashlib part of SolidOS Databrowser Frontend is *read-write*. Where the user is allowed to edit: it lets them edit the data and create new things. It is *live* in that often the databrowser signed up (using a websocket) for any changes which other users make, so users' screens are synchronized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mashlib part of SolidOS Databrowser Frontend is *read-write;* that is, the user is allowed to edit data and create new things. It is *live,* in that often the databrowser subscribed (using a websocket) for any changes which other users make, so users' screens are synchronized.
```

> A major limitation of their data browser hack is that current web browsers are made to distrust any code loaded from one domain that uses data from another domain. This makes it hard, strangely complicated, and sometimes impossible to do some things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A major limitation of this data browser hack is that current web browsers are made to distrust any code loaded from one domain that uses data from another domain. This makes it hard, strangely complicated, and sometimes impossible to do some things.
```
